today I want to update you with the
latest plans for our program of test
track and trace how we're going to use
this massive testing capability that
we've built in order to get our down and
keep our down before I do that I just
want to remind you of what we're trying
to achieve our plan is to slow the
spread and to protect the NHS so that
the NHS is always there for you and your
family whenever you need it
whether for coronavirus or anything else
that goal is working the number of spare
critical care beds in the NHS is 3413 on
the latest figures there have been 1
million 291,000 tests for coronavirus
including 85,000 186 tests on Sunday
yesterday a hundred and ninety thousand
584 people have now tested positive for
coronavirus an increase of three
thousand nine hundred and eighty-five
thirteen thousand two hundred and fifty
eight people are in hospital with
coronavirus and twenty eight thousand
seven hundred and thirty-four people
have died that's across all settings an
increase of 288 that figure is lower
than at any point since the end of March
but as with testing these reported
figures tend to be lower over the
weekend so we do do expect that number
to rise and remember this is not just a
number but it is a constant insistent
reminder that we must go further and
faster in our national effort in dealing
with this virus over the last month
we've built a national testing
infrastructure capable of over a hundred
thousand tests a day today the capacity
stands at a hundred and eight thousand
this means we're now in a position to
start implementing the next part of our
plan track and trace the aim of test
track and trace is to hunt down and
isolate the virus so it's unable to
reproduce and crucially test track and
trace allows us to take a more targeted
approach to lock down while still safely
containing the disease creating this
system is a huge national undertaking of
unprecedented scale and complexity we've
already taken Britain's small but
brilliant Diagnostics industry and taken
it to global scale
we're building an army of human contact
races who command the phones and find
the contacts and support people and of
course we're developing the contact
tracing app which can help us deliver
test track and trace on the mass scale
that we need across the country the app
which takes full consideration of
privacy and security has already been
tested in closed conditions at an RAF
base and today I can announce the next
steps from tomorrow we will begin to
pilot test track and trace on the Isle
of Wight starting with health
professionals and rolling out this week
to all citizens I'm grateful to the huge
enthusiasm shown by Islanders who who
know that by participating in this pilot
they're at the forefront of helping get
Britain back on her feet
where the Isle of Wight goes Britain
follows the island has a single NHS
trust one local authority with the
responsibilities for Public Health a
relatively low number of Kovac cases and
because it's an island we can run this
trial in proper scientifically
controlled conditions comparing the
effect with the effect and with what's
going on on the mainland before we roll
it out to the rest of the country so
here's how it'll work last week we put
in place the testing capability on the
island from tonight the contact tracing
capability will go live and then
tomorrow NHS staff on the island will be
able to download the app and from
Thursday each one of the
80,000 households on the island we'll
get a letter from the chief nurse with
comprehensive information about the
trial Islanders will then be asked to
install the app once you've installed
the app it'll start logging the distance
between your phone and other phones with
an app nearby it's been designed with a
form of Bluetooth that conserves power
so the app won't drain your battery and
this log of proximity information will
then be securely stored on your phone if
you become unwell with kovat symptoms
you inform the NHS via the app other app
users who you've had significant contact
with in the last few days will then be
sent an alert by the NHS along with
advice about what to do a test ordering
function will then be built-in if you're
watching this and you live on the Isle
of Wight I have a simple message please
download the app to protect the NHS and
save lives by downloading the app you're
protecting your own health you're
protecting the health of your loved ones
and the health of your community I know
the people of the Isle of Wight will
embrace this with enthusiasm because by
embarking on this project and by
embracing test track and trace you will
be saving lives the pilot is important
so we can help make sure the app works
as well as it possibly can alongside the
contact tracing system and with your
help we'll learn a lot we'll use it to
make things better and we want to hear
from you I want to stress and this is
really important that this trial does
not mean the end of social distancing on
the Isle of Wight or anywhere else for
that matter
we will only change the social
distancing rules
once our five tests are met so I'll end
with the instruction that we all know
please stay at home protect the NHS
and save lives or if you live on the
Isle of Wight stay at home install the
app protect the NHS and save lives I'll
now turn to Professor van tam to take us
through the days chance
John thank you Security age so let's
begin again with refreshing the five
tests that we have in place for deciding
if we're going to adjust the lockdown
the first is around NHS capacity and
we're in a good position on that one the
second one is about a sustained and
consistent fall in daily deaths from
coronavirus and it is now very clear in
the data that we are past the peak the
next one is solid information that the
rate of infection is decreasing to
manageable levels right across the board
this is an indicator that we need to
keep a close eye on over the next few
days and weeks the fourth one is around
operational challenges around testing
and PPE and being able to meet future
demand there are continuing challenges
on PPE it is an absolute priority to
continue pushing on this to get it right
in the long run but of course in on
testing as you've heard from the
Secretary of State we're in a very good
position and finally we have to be
confident that the adjustments we
contemplate are not going to risk a
second peak of infections and this is
really a matter of deep scientific
discussion very very close following an
absorbing of the evidence and one that
we're keeping under detailed scientific
review as the days and weeks go by next
slide please
now this slide actually shows search
data of people looking at Apple Maps
for directions over driving over walking
routes or over using public transport
and it tells the same story as slides
you have seen before about how since we
announced these social distancing
measures the public continued to observe
the instructions to work with us to work
to protect the NHS and get case numbers
down and you can see very very
consistent trends over reduced searches
for driving instructions walking
instructions and use of public transport
so we need to keep going let's keep
going and continue to drop the curve
further next slide please
these are this is a graph showing from
the 6th of April through to the 4th of
May daily tests completed for
coronavirus and you can see on the right
hand side the latest data showing 85,000
tests completed on the 4th of May our
capacity is 108 thousand tests and there
is another lab opening next week so this
is all very encouraging tests are going
up people are using testing services
more and we are well within our capacity
capability next slide please
now this slide shows new cases of
coronavirus in the UK from the 21st of
March you can see that obvious peak up
to a high level in early April and then
you can see the pattern that has
occurred in terms of new cases right up
until the 4th of May on this one I have
to say that new cases need to come down
further we have to continue to track
this index and we have to get cases
lower
if you look to the next slide please
here we array the number of people in
hospital with kovat 19 from 17th of
March through to the 3rd of May and
after peaks in the middle of April you
can see that in almost all areas now
there are steady that absolutely
consistent declines occurring possibly
in a small number of areas the trend is
somewhat flat but overall there are now
steady declines in the number of people
in hospital this is good news
following on please the next slide
critical care beds ICU beds here again
across all four nations you can see
largely continuing declines and possibly
a more important point if you look at
the axis on the left of the slide the
y-axis you can see where we are in terms
of capacity and there is plenty of ICU
capacity which is extremely good I turn
now to deaths in all settings and here
you can see that there is a slow but
consistent decline you will see the
weekend effect very clearly especially
if you look at the three steps on the
right-hand side of the chart fewer
deaths are actually recorded reported at
the weekends that's an artifact of the
way people report deaths but overall if
you look at the orange line the
seven-day and smoothed out rolling
average there is this slow but
consistent decline which is absolutely
going in the right direction now and
then the final slide is one we have
shown for some time showing a comparison
across countries dating back to the day
when 50/50 cumulative deaths were
recorded in each of the countries and
we're now quite a way across the slide
260 old days in some of the countries
the message is the same as I've said to
you before that there are kind of three
broad trends on this curve but I do want
to emphasize to you these are numbers
they are not rates they do not adjust
for the size of the underlying
population and this is a difficulty in
interpreting these data we will in the
course of time be able to get all caused
age-adjusted
excess mortality for many of the
countries on this slide
and that will give us a much clearer
understanding of what is going on and
hopefully those data will continue for a
long period of time so that we can
understand the fullness of the picture
as we try to beat this virus I will stop
there with the data and hand back to the
Secretary of State thank you very much
Jonathan and we're now going to take
questions and the first question from a
member of the public we have a video
from sac Lane from London what is being
done to ensure that be am key workers
are not disproportionately affected by
ovid 19 and what steps are being taken
to provide support to the families of
those victims who have sadly passed away
thank you cycling an incredibly
important question to impending credibly
important questions both of which we're
working hard to address and I'm going to
ask Jonathan to set out the details but
what I'd say absolutely from the start
is that we recognize that there has been
a disproportionately high number of
people from black and ethnic minority
backgrounds who have passed away
especially amongst the care workers and
those in the NHS and I I pay tribute to
them before and I will do so again
because the NHS is an amazing
organization that has been built on the
dedication of people from all
backgrounds and it's including many many
who've come
to this country - to give their lives
working in the NHS and
disproportionately employs people from
ethnic minority backgrounds and yet we
have seen this impact in the data and I
think it's affected a lot of us working
on it to see that and so we've got a lot
of work going in to fully understand
scientifically and make sure that in
every single case we learn what we can
to protect people better in terms of
support for the families of those who've
passed away for those working in the NHS
we have a we now have a program of
support that we've been able to put in
place that is there for everybody who
has a is from a family where where
somebody has died while since ervice and
including across pharmacy across social
can that's so that I think that's a
really important thing for us to do to
recognize the the sacrifice of those put
themselves at risk by going to work in
this in what can be dangerous conditions
where they might be working with those
who have covered 19 Jonathan yes I'm
extremely sorry whenever I hear of a
health care worker death due to
coronavirus whether it's someone from a
black and minority ethnic group or
otherwise it doesn't change the fact
that it takes courage to work in the NHS
at a time like this and it's most
difficult on the subject of the signal
that we have so far on black and
minority ethnic groups I want to say to
you that we are taking it incredibly
seriously there is a very big piece of
scientific work now ongoing that will
report to the chief medical officer and
we'll get to the bottom of this however
long it takes us but I will also say
that this is a complicated picture
because
when you start to study patterns of
disease across different ethnic groups
you also have to take into account
potential differences in the age
structure between groups also
differences in the patterns of
underlying medical conditions which we
know do vary by ethnic group and
therefore it's a complicated picture and
also deprivation has to be taken into
account where people live and all of
this is complex it takes time and I'm
not going to rush that answer I think we
owe it to minority ethnic groups to get
this right and get a clear signal for
you and you'll have worked out I'm from
an ethnic minority group and we will get
to the bottom of this it could be that
Professor Newton has some further
epidemiological granularity he'd like to
add on this point thank you Jonathan
well just to say that we are as you say
looking at the data very carefully not
just on ethnicity but also on age sex
and other factors such as obesity which
we know do have an impact on the effect
of coronavirus but it's already clear
from some of the published data that the
impacted in bmu groups is greater that
there are more people with the infection
and those who have the infection have
have worse outcomes in many cases so
there is already cause for concern but
as Johnson says we're not entirely
entirely clear how much of that is due
to different levels of underlying
conditions or other risk factors so
there is work to be done and we will be
publishing this as soon as it's ready
thank you very much thank you cycling
the next questions from Conrad from
Ashford and Conrad asks going forward
will the primary aim of test track and
trace be to squash the occurrence of
covered 19 infection to very low levels
or simply to flatten the curve enough
that the NHS is not overwhelmed and that
is a really important question Conrad
the answer is that test track and trace
will help us to get the R down and to
get the number of new cases
and to keep it down but not on its own
it's primarily the social distancing
measures that we've taken so far that
have flattened the curve and now the we
can see that the curve is going down
from the presentation that Professor van
Thanh just gave the goal is to keep the
number of new infections going down and
bring in the test track and trace or at
a point which we will do well tomorrow
from tomorrow in the Isle of Wight and
then rolling out to the rest of the
country will will that we will get those
numbers down the test tracking trace
becomes more effective the lower the
number and then we want to keep the
number going down by keeping the are
below one the rate of infection so it is
not our goal is not simply to flatten
the curve it is to get the occurrence of
covered 19 infections to very low levels
to be absolutely clear within your
question that that is the answer thanks
very much and we'll now take questions
from the media upin from the BBC thank
you very much when will you have
recruited your 18,000 contact tracers
and when will the full test track and
trace network be up and running the aim
is to have the whole thing up and
running in the by the middle of this
month we're starting already we've
already started the recruitment we have
of the 18,000 we have thousands already
recruited and we are making very rapid
progress not only in the recruitment but
also the the training that's necessary a
short piece of training and we have
enough to get going on the Isle of Wight
in fact they came on stream as of five
o'clock this evening so there that's up
and running now and then to roll out
across the country but there's no
there's no magic around the 18,000
figure that is the initial scale that we
think is necessary if we needs to be
bigger when we find out from the ons
survey that's in the field at the moment
what the
prevalence of the disease is the number
of new cases per day actually out there
rather than that that we find through
positive tests then we will then we'll
adjust that figure that's the initial
goal but it'll be up and running by the
middle of the month of course on
business some businesses will be
required to have PPE for their staff
where will they procure it and will they
be in competition with the NHS well this
is a really important question when we
consider changes to the social
distancing measures the wider impact of
changes to social distancing measures
including for instance on PPE and the
first call on PPE must go to the NHS and
social care and those other essential
services who need it to keep the people
delivering those services safe and so
that is something that we take into
account it's in our five tests but it is
something that we're working very hard
on now of course it's our job in running
the health and social care system to
ensure that those areas and the other
public services have PPE but and there's
a worldwide shortage and as you say so
we do need to take that into
consideration
before making before making changes and
that's why it's one of the five tests
thanks very much Tom Clark from ITV
thank you Secretary of State's and the
most successful contact tracing efforts
around the world like those of you now
South Korea Singapore were only partly
reliant on mobile phone technology in
order to work they were more reliant on
large numbers of volunteers on a
community level going out to track down
and trace cases at huge scale has the
government ensured this capacity is in
place in the UK or are we putting too
much faith in call centres and in
untested digital technologies so whoever
they may be
it's a really important point and I
agree with the with the points in the
question which is that it isn't just
about the technology and the people in
call centers it's also about citizens
acting in the right way
acting in the right way to download the
app because that protects you and
protects your family and protects the
NHS but also acting in the right way to
do contact tracing yourself John really
good it's a really good point well made
the app is very exciting and the app
adds something extra that's some an
automated response that can be almost
immediate but as you say the program
that we're putting in place is an
integrated program with the app but also
with contact tracing driven by testing
so access to testing partly through the
app but also other routes to a test and
then the test result backed up by
contact tracing driven by public health
professionals at one level we've got
public health England but also a lot of
experience on the ground with directors
of public health and local authorities
environmental health officers who are
very expert in this exactly as you say
shoe-leather epidemiology out on the
streets
finding contacts and but even actually
what people call traditional contact
tracing isn't very traditional anymore
it's quite also it's quite highly
technical so we've developed a web-based
supports a contact tracing an advisory
service which has been ramped up to
support this and there's also another
line of defence through the telephone
call centre so it's a multi-layered
approach and one of the points of the
Isle of Wight test pilot is to try and
see how those different elements
integrate together to support each other
so it's a very good point we are
learning from the best practice around
the world but we also have something to
offer in the UK as well because we've
been doing this for a long time thanks
Tom I hope that answers your question
yes may have a quick follow up question
are we are we caught in something of a
catch-22 with contact tracing that as I
understand it the numbers of cases have
to fall quite a bit more before we can
reliably roll it out across the country
but if we keep lockdown measures in
place which we have to until your fifth
test is met it's quite hard to pilot to
contact tracing because most of us are
trying to isolate ourselves as much as
possible
so no it's the short answer the and the
lot is slightly longer answer is that
even with social know social distancing
measures there still are some new cases
and the and that means that the that the
technology can still be effective and
even with the scale of of of new cases
across the country contact tracing can
still have an impact and the app will
still be highly effective it's just more
effective the fewer the number of new
cases so these are all matters of degree
rather than absolute so we're not caught
in a in a in a catch-22 but it is
absolutely true that the social
distancing measures of all the thing
that in doing they're having the big
impact and so the hence the you know the
message remains stay at home to protect
the NHS and save lives
unless you're in the Isle of Wight but
in your even in the Isle of Wight you
should still stay at home to protect the
NHS and save lives it's that you should
also install the app because that will
help it this to be yet more effective
one final point on this which is the
Isle of Wight has a slightly lower rate
of covert new covert infections than
some other places in the country and
therefore actually is a that makes it a
good place to test this not only is it
good because it will help the Isle of
Wight but it is also good because it has
that slightly lower number of new
infections lockdown measures until
contact tracing is up and running across
the country no the two aren't aren't
necessarily linked like that we haven't
said that you we can't make changes
before it's up and running it's just
that the test track and trace system
will help us to get our down and hold
our down and the lower the number of new
cases the more effective it will be but
we haven't made a concrete
link that your question drew between the
number between the having this system of
in place nationally and making changes
to the social distancing measures we
there isn't a necessary link between the
two they're just they they do work in
tandem the next question is from oliver
dyer from isle of wight radio even in
all in a poll that i love white radio
ran today 80% of our listeners said they
would install this new app but the
island has a higher than average elderly
population who fall into the governments
of vulnerable category how are you
expecting those who don't have a
smartphone or can't use that technology
bids on the island or across the country
to get behind this and with that in mind
considering the islands has an elderly
population one of the questions our
listeners want to know is why the
islands been chosen over other over as a
UK islands all locations so look that's
a great set of questions Oliver and I'm
really really pleased to hear that
eighty percent of people said that they
would download the app and because the
more people who download the app the
more effective it's going to be because
it's a you need you need two people
having downloaded the app for it to be
effective for one to be able to tell the
other that they've been in close contact
with somebody who's got symptoms of
covert 19 and so I'm really pleased that
the people of the Isle of Wight have
responded today in this way III had a
feeling that they would and I'm really
glad that they have and but partly
because of the challenges that you set
out that not everybody has a smartphone
that that's that's another reason
actually to test it in the Isle of Wight
because if we tested it somewhere where
it would be easy we wouldn't find as
many of the challenges rather than
testing it somewhere where you've got to
do that you've got to have the
technology but you've got to have the
human contact tracing as well they go
they go hand in hand they help each
other and so that's that is actually one
of the things we thought about before
choosing the Isle of Wight as their as
the place to go first
John do you
yeah thank you I mean I think the Isle
of Wight is an ideal place to do this
it's quite a large population and there
is a benefit in the fact that travel on
and off the island is relatively
restricted the ferries are there but
they're running relatively infrequently
so it is an ideal place to look at the
epidemiology and see the impact it's
also I used to be the Regional Director
of Public Health for South Central
including the Isle of Wight I know that
the islet the island is is very well
equipped to respond to things that is
it's a very coherent group we've had
tremendous support from the local
authority from the NHS from the local MP
and like everybody else I think it's
going to be a great success as a as a
pilot and your point about elderly
people I think we shouldn't first you
shouldn't make assumptions and you know
quite a lot of elderly people are
extremely tech savvy and quite happy to
use smartphones but we've also
recognized that there are other ways of
doing contact tracing so as I mentioned
we've built in a number of routes so
people don't have to have the app in
order to benefit but of course we will
all benefit if the app and the contact
tracing drives down the infection rate
it drives down the infection rate for
everybody and I think the third point to
say is that the people who are most
mobile and most likely to be out bumping
into each other are also the people who
are probably most likely to be using
smartphones so I think all in all we
think it's a strong program and we're
looking forward to seeing how it works
in your other white and that that survey
is extremely encouraging so thank you it
does yeah I'm gonna add one more
follow-up go ahead fantastic so
obviously whilst a lot of people will
love I love our radio listeners in
particular I have been positive about
the app there are some concerns that the
lockdown measures could be lifted here
early to form part of that trial could
lock down on the Isle of Wight be lifted
earlier than the rest of the new tape
and if so is it safe to do so well I
want to thank I love white radio
listeners for how much they've engaged
with this this this idea today and I can
reassure you that there aren't any
changes to social distancing measures
that are proposed as part of this pilot
the pilot is to find out how the app
works how the interaction of people then
becomes recognized by the technology and
the the link from that to the human
contact tracing and to the testing
regime because there's a new testing
center on the Isle of Wight as well so
there aren't changes our proposals are
that changes to be to the social
distancing will only take place when the
five tests are met and that's nationally
rather than the Isle of Wight having
having any differences in that part to
the rest of the country thanks very much
indeed Oliver Joe Murphy from the
Evening Standard
good afternoon can I ask the scientists
how has your understanding of immunity
developed over the last month or so do
you know yet whether people will catch
it again and how are the tests
developing how how the testing of the
tests going do you see antibodies and
immunity playing a really significant
role in easing out of lockdown or not
and Secretary's take if I could just ask
a follow to Conrad's question who asked
how low the numbers we go you said very
low can you put a figure on that the
answer to the second question is no and
the answer to the first question is and
I'll say a little and then I'll ask both
scientists to come in John on the
testing and jbt on the science of
immunity what I'd say is that antibody
testing is incredibly important we have
antibody tests in the field at the
moment they're being used for surveys
they are lab based rather than the
rather than the automatic response tests
that we looked into in great detail a
month or so ago but then none of them
were effective enough to be used for
clinical reasons but they can still be
used for surveys so we have surveys in
the field both with the the stick tests
and also with lab based
serology which detects antibodies so we
will be getting estimates soon of the
proportion of the population who have
the antibodies and the test tests for
whether the antibodies are there the
effect of the antibodies on your risk to
catching or transmitting corona virus in
the future is the is the next important
step in that and the science on that has
been rapidly developing and I asked jvt
to update on that yes thank you for the
question so on antibodies one of the
things we want to know is when you've
had in Kovac 19 infection do you get
antibodies do they protect you against
further instances of the same illness
and how long are they going to protect
you for so that's kind of three
questions really
so let's chop this up into three answers
and the first answer is the first thing
we wanted to know was once you've had
confirmed kovat 19 infection do you get
antibodies and one of the things that
we've been interested in and want to do
is call people back who've had a Ovid 19
for sure and who've recovered to ask
them if they'll begin to take part in a
program we're starting to get plasma
containing antibodies and use it for
treatment in the future in trials to
understand if it's going to work and
save lives and the good news on that is
that that program has started and the
overwhelming majority of people so far
called back who've had definite kovat 19
infection have got antibodies in their
blood stream which is a good news thing
so those antibodies take different times
in different people to develop but by
and large the signal is that people get
antibodies the next question is do those
antibodies protect you from
further infections and we just haven't
had this disease around on the planet in
humans for long enough to know the
answers to that with any surety and
that's a piece of science that we will
just have to follow a bit longer I hope
the answer is yes but I think it's one
where we have to be much clearer before
we can take that responsibility of
giving you a very clear answer on that
and then the final piece is how long
will the antibodies last and we do know
that for other normal coronaviruses if
that's the right word the ones that are
a couple of viruses that together with
many others cause what we'd call the
common cold that those antibodies don't
persist necessarily for years and years
and years now it doesn't follow that
that's going to be the case with Kovach
19 we do not know at this point we will
have to simply follow people who've
recovered and test them repeatedly until
we have an understanding of how long
antibodies last and how long they
protect for but there is an absolutely
massive piece of work now underway
multiple studies to look for antibodies
in different populations in the UK and
indeed to follow some people who've
recovered for long periods of time into
the future at least a couple of years
and we will have much clearer signals
over time but I'm afraid it's just one
of those where we can't make the science
go any faster than how quickly our
bodies go in terms of maintaining the
antibodies and like everybody else in
the world we just have to be patient and
cautious until we get those answers but
I do believe in the long run once we
have those kind of answers potentially
antibody testing will be a very
important part of our future strategy
Thanks
in fact I'm
so because I was tested positive and now
I have the I have fairly regularly
somebody comes and takes blood to ensure
that to test whether I have antibodies
and then also to test whether I get it
again because we have surveys in the
field right now to test if people with
antibodies then catch the disease which
is an absolutely critical fact that will
then determine policy over what we say
people with antibodies who tested
positive on an antibody test can do and
which is at the moment we don't yet have
the science to make those policy
decisions but it'll be absolutely
critical John did you have anything to
add on that's just just briefly on the
testing there's been really very good
progress on the antibody test there are
at least two large commercial
organizations to develop good lab based
antibody tests which we're currently
evaluating but also people looking at
ways in of doing antibody tests close to
the person the patient and there are a
number of options there including a
saliva test and all of these options are
looking quite promising and being
evaluated so I think in general we can
say as we did as we thought that there
would be antibody tests available when
we needed them and they will support
also our contact tracing program and
strategy later on fantastic follow-up
and thank you all three for very
informative answers there so to state
life's full of risks and this is all
about balance of risks you're somebody
who's probably got antibodies would you
feel happy going into a crowded room not
yet not yet I very much hope that the
science shows that the people with
antibodies who tested positive for
having antibodies are have a low risk of
transmitting the disease and a low risk
of catching it both are important
because low risk of catching it to
protect me low risk of transmitting it
to protect others I hope that that's
where the science comes out that is true
of most corona viruses i but we've got
to make sure that we've got the science
because until we know that's the case we
can't be sure of it we can't
based a policy decision on it and I
can't be comfortable doing what you
mentioned in the question because that
might simply trigger a rise in the
number of infections if the science
turns out that to be wrong and there are
so many novel things about this
coronavirus the there are so many things
that are different to previous there's
the six existing corona viruses that we
do have to test this and not base our
assumptions on how other corona viruses
behave because you you know i we don't
want to take the risk of assuming this
corona virus behaves like other corona
viruses before saying and taking a
policy decision that people with
antibodies are lower risk but if the
science concludes that they that they
are then will take decisions on on that
basis and i would say this this point of
John's that there's been big advances in
antibody testing especially the lab
based antibody testing is very it's very
important today rush the Swiss global
Diagnostics company made a very positive
announcement about progress with their
antibody tests and we're in discussions
with them about a very large-scale
rollout of antibody testing as well as
with some others who may be able to
bring this forward but there's been
false hope before in antibody testing
and so I will will make announcements
when we're absolutely ready thanks very
much Joe Paul wor from The Huffington
Post L secretary as you frequently said
the long-term solution to this pandemic
is a fully scaled up vaccine for kovat
19 yeah but a vaccine relies on as many
people as possible actually taking it up
now you told HuffPost last year and i
quote there's a very strong argument for
having compulsory vaccinations for
children for when they go to school
because otherwise they're putting other
children at risk would that apply to a
covert vaccine as well as to MMR and
other vaccines and what are the measures
are you looking at to ensure as many
adults and children take up the new
vaccine when it's available and if I can
to Professor van Tam can I ask you what
you've made of the
the academic research done in Harvard
Germany and even Cambridge that suggests
high levels of air pollution may be one
of the most important contributors to
the clustering of deaths from kovat 19
is sage looking at that or going to look
at that thanks Paul two very good
questions on the vaccine and the first
and most important thing is that we
support the development of the vaccine
and you all have seen the Prime
Minister's excellent announcement today
and then that we also ensure do the work
to ensure that people can get access to
the vaccines starting with those who are
most vulnerable
and the on the question of whether to
make it compulsory I think that the
extent of the public's reaction to
following the lockdown shows that we
will be able to achieve very very high
levels of vaccination without taking
that step and and so you know our task
is to ensure that it is in the first
instance we support the science as much
as possible because we called assume
there'll be a vaccine
there's no coronavirus vaccine yet and
for any of the existing coronaviruses
and this is uncertain science but whilst
I don't rule anything out i we're
presuming we're proceeding on the basis
that just such a huge proportion of the
population are going to take this up
because of the obvious benefits to
individuals and their families and their
communities and indeed the whole nation
that there'll be an enormous demand for
it as and when the science is safe to
proceed Thank You secretary so just to
stay on the vaccine question for a
little longer and we are following the
developments in vaccine research across
the world including in the UK we remain
very hopeful that there will be a
breakthrough at some point in the future
I think what I can say to you is that it
is more likely than not that the first
vaccines will be licensed in adults in
the first in
and therefore one has to take put some
caveats around your question around
children and the other thing to say is
that so far the epidemiological evidence
is not showing us that there is a
massive burden of disease or burden of
mortality and children it is actually
completely at the other end of the scale
it is in the elderly and so from that
perspective again that's another caveat
I'd add to your question about
vaccinating children on the second
question about air pollution and thank
you for that I think we already have
very solid data that air pollution
contributes to a whole range of
mortality particularly from respiratory
illnesses and respiratory diseases and
cardiovascular disease I have heard it
said about air pollution and kovat 19 I
have not personally studied those data
and looked at that question in detail
but what you say is entirely plausible
in my view and professor Newton may have
some further observations on air
pollution well they're only your general
point that we know that air pollution
because it's so pervasive and affects so
many people has a huge burden but like
Jonathan I haven't looked at those
papers but but I think there's something
that we will get back to you yeah just
one brief follow-up Secretary of State
you have a message for those
anti-vaxxers here and abroad when we
when and if we do get a vaccine took
over in nineteen I think there has been
no greater demonstration in modern
history that vaccines save lives than
the need for a vaccine to save lives and
to get the world going again following
the outbreak of kovat nineteen and we
will only license a vaccine when it is
both effective and safe and when the
independent regulators if and when the
independent regulators
licensed a vaccine in this country they
will do so knowing that it will that it
is safe and everybody should follow that
everybody should follow that advice
thanks very much
so finally we're going to go to Louise
Hill from the Isle of Wight County press
Thank You mr. secretary and as local
democracy reporter on the Isle of Wight
I have seen a mixed reaction to the app
but a main concern that keeps occurring
is whether you can assure Island
residents who are wary of using the app
when this technology that their data
will be kept fully protected and private
throughout this trial and going forward
and the government will be fully
transparent with Islanders about the way
this app works yes absolutely this is an
incredibly important question I was very
glad to hear from Oliver from Isle of
Wight radio that on his initial survey
there was a very high degree of support
for the for the app and for downloading
it but it has been the app has been
designed with privacy and security front
of mind it's been signed off by the
National Cyber Security Center who've
been involved in its development and I
want to thank them and pay tribute to
the work that they've done in ensuring
that the privacy and cybersecurity is
strong the data is stored on an
individual's phone not by the by the NHS
until somebody finds that they've got
symptoms and then they need a test and
so they need to connect to the NHS and
then you need to the NHS needs to
contact those who you've been in contact
with and so the the this has this has
the highest level of privacy built in to
make sure that we can both reassure
people in terms of privacy but also that
it can be effective and save lives I
don't know if you've got anything
exactly right so just to be absolutely
clear the app itself doesn't hold any
personal information it just has
information about the phone where it was
which other phones it's been in contact
with but only using anonymized randomly
generated numb
and those are the data that are collated
so no personal information is general is
that is contained by the app or
generated by the app the circular State
the only personal information used is
when somebody approaches the NHS to have
a test or to have their contact right so
it is a it's a very safe use of data and
people really should feel very reassured
by have been taken thanks very much
indeed
thank you from the islet have you got a
follow-up you've got it so as you said
earlier we're told to look down won't be
eased on the island as part of the
roller rollout of this app does that
that means people are already either at
home or making very limited trips and as
the app is predominantly aimed at the
islands keys workers will that guarantee
enough useful data for the app going
forward this is a really important
question that we thought about when
selecting where to to trial it because
there's a busy hospital on the island
and there's other and key workers
including those who work for the council
for instance and in the other services
and the right across the board there are
there are interactions and there are new
cases on the island and so we think that
that it will be effective and it would
be an effective place to pilot but also
but we think that the that the test
track and trace system as a whole will
be more effective when there are fewer
new cases because then when you do find
a new case we can really support that
person find out who they've been in
contact with and then contact all of
those people and it's quite a metallo of
effort and support into then trying to
stop that case from spreading any
further so actually the the the test
track and trade system as a whole will
be more effective when there's fewer
cases and currently there are fewer
cases on the island than there are in
the rest of the country thank you very
much indeed
thanks to for all the questions from the
public from the national media from the
I love white and and I'm very grateful
for this opportunity to have set out
these details of our test track a test
track and trace program and look forward
to seeing you again here from here in
Downing Street very soon thanks very
much